README.md, before:

# IPsec VPN on OPNsense with iOS, macOS

Getting IPsec VPN on OPNsense to work with iOS and macOS was too difficult.

## Versions

OPNsense 23.1.7_3 (but verified up to OPNsense 24.7.5_3)
iOS 16 and up
macOS Monterey and up

## Add group "VPN" [optional]

This step is optional, but it helps to ensure that only users in the VPN group can obtain VPN access.

System → Access → Groups → + (Add)
Group name: VPN
Description: VPN users

## Add one VPN user

System → Access → Users → + (Add)
Username: vpnuser *(or any other name that you prefer)*
Password: [password]

Optional (if you created the VPN group before)
Group membership: make sure that "Member Of" contains "VPN"

## Create IPsec VPN, configure Mobile Clients

VPN → IPsec → Mobile Clients
[unless otherwise noted, all checkboxes are off]
✅ Enable IPsec Mobile Client Support
Backend for authentication: Local Database
(Optional, if you created a "VPN" group above): Enforce local group: VPN
Virtual IPv4 Address Pool: ✅ Provide a virtual IPv4 address to clients
Virtual IPv4 Address Pool: 192.168.2.0/24
DNS Servers: ✅ Provide a DNS server list to clients
DNS Servers: Server #1: 192.168.1.1 *(this needs to be the local IP of your OPNsense router)*
DNS Servers: Server #2: 8.8.8.8 *(optional)*
DNS Servers: Server #3: 8.8.4.4 *(optional)*
Phase 2 PFS Group: off
[all other checkboxes are off]

Save, Apply changes

## Create IPsec VPN, Create Phase 1

VPN → IPsec → Mobile Clients, press on "Create Phase1" at the top of the page, in the blue message bar.
Connection method: default
Key Exchange version: auto
Internet Protocol: IPv4
Interface: WAN
Description: Mobile VPN *(or anything else descriptive)*

Phase 1 proposal (Authentication)
Authentication method: Mutual PSK + Xauth
My identifier: My IP address
Pre-Shared Key: *(insert some randomly generate garbage, make sure you store it in a password manager)*

Phase 1 proposal (Algorithms)
Encryption algorithm: AES
Encryption algorithm: 256
Hash algorithm: SHA256, SHA384, SHA512
DH key group: 2, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18

Advanced options
[all uncheck unless otherwise noted]
Install policy: ✅
NAT Traversal: Enable
Lifetime: 28800

Save, Apply changes

## Create IPsec VPN, Create Phase 2

VPN → IPsec → Tunnel Settings [legacy], in the newly created Phase 1 row, press on the + in the "Commands" column. (Do **NOT** press on the + below the row, because that creates a new Phase 1 row.)

Mode: Tunnel IPv4
Description: *(something descriptive or leave empty)*
Type: Network
Address: 0.0.0.0 / 0 *(that is, set "0.0.0.0" in the Address field and choose 0 from the dropdown)*
Protocol: ESP
Encryption algorithms: AES128, AES192, AES256
Hash algorithms: SHA256, SHA384, SHA512
PFS key group: off
Lifetime: 3600
Automatically ping host: [leave empty]

Save, Apply changes

## Enable IPsec!

VPN → IPsec → Tunnel Settings

✅ Enable IPsec (near the bottom of the page)

Apply changes

## Firewall settings: WAN rules

Firewall → Rules → WAN

Add the following three rules:

Interface: WAN
**TCP/IP Version: IPv4**
**Protocol: ESP**
Source: any
Destination: WAN address
Description: IPsec ESP

Interface: WAN
**TCP/IP Version: IPv4**
**Protocol: TCP/UDP**
Source: any
Destination: WAN address
**Destination port range: from: ISAKMP, to: ISAKMP**
Description: IPsec ISAKMP

Interface: WAN
**TCP/IP Version: IPv4**
**Protocol: UDP**
Source: any
Destination: WAN address
**Destination port range: from: IPsec NAT-T, to: IPsec NAT-T**
Description: IPsec NAT-T

The result should be:

 	IPv4 ESP      *   *   WAN address   *                      *     *     IPsec ESP
 	IPv4 UDP      *   *   WAN address   500  (ISAKMP)          *     *     IPsec ISAKMP
 	IPv4 UDP      *   *   WAN address   4500 (IPsec NAT-T)     *     *     IPsec NAT-T

Apply changes

## Firewall settings: IPsec rules

Firewall → Rules → IPsec

Add the following rule:

Interface: IPsec
TCP/IP Version: IPv4
Protocol: any
Source: any
Destination: any

The result should be:

```
IPv4 *     *     *     *     *     *     *
```

Apply changes

## Firewall settings: Outbound NAT

Firewall → NAT → Outbound

You should not have to touch anything here. But verify that Mode is set to "Automatic outbound NAT rule generation".

And verify that in the automatic rules you see the VPN network range listed under Source Networks (so 192.168.2.0/24 in this example).

## Make DNS respond to queries from the VPN

Services → Unbound DNS → Access Lists

Add the following (using the + / Add button):

Access List name: 192.168.2.0/24 *(this is an open field, it does not matter)*
Action: Allow
Network: 192.168.2.0 / 24 *(this needs to be the range you chose under Mobile Clients)*
Description: VPN DNS access

Save, Apply changes

## Optional: allow single user to create multiple VPN connections

Normally, a single user cannot create more than one simultaneous VPN connection (for example, using multiple devices). That means that a second device connecting to VPN with the same username would disconnect the first device's VPN connection.

### New method

You can change this by modifying/editing your Phase 1 and change the "Unique" parameter to one of the following values:

- Replace
  - A new connection will replace any existing one.
- Keep
  - A new connection will be blocked while there is an existing one
- No
  - Multiple connections can be made
- Never
  - The system will not check for multiple connections

Then save and apply the changes.

### Old Method

Previously, there was no UI option to fix this, so it required ssh access to the OPNsense server (via System → Settings → Administration → Enable Secure Shell).

Then ssh into the router, create file `/usr/local/etc/ipsec.opnsense.d/uniqueids-override.conf` and set it with the following contents:

```
config setup
  uniqueids = no
```

Then trigger a VPN restart through the UI.

## Ridiculous: A reboot may be necessary

Yes, this is ridiculous, but it did solve DNS problems for me and a number of other problems.

## Configuring IPsec VPN on iPhone
First make sure that your iPhone is outside of your WLAN.

Settings → VPN → Add VPN Configuration...

Type: IPsec
Description: [whatever you wish]
Server: [public IP of OPNsense router]
Account: vpnuser *(or the user you added above)*
Password: [password of vpnuser]
Use Certificate: [leave off]
Group Name: [leave empty]
Secret: [use the Pre-Shared Key configured above]

## Configuring IPsec VPN on macOS

System Preferences → Network → + (Add) button near the bottom left

Interface: VPN, VPN Type: Cisco IPSec
Service Name: VPN (OPNsense) *(or whatever name you like)*
Server Address: [public IP of OPNsense router]
Account Name: vpnuser *(or the user you added above)*
Password: [password of vpnuser]

Under Authentication Settings:
Shared Secret: [use the Pre-Shared Key configured above]

## Sources (thank you!)

* OPNsense setup, albeit incomplete: https://docs.opnsense.org/manual/vpnet.html
* Netgate documentation: https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/ipsec-mobile-ikev1-xauth.html
* A few forum discussions that helped
  * VPN Configuration: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=10955.0
  * Debugging DNS: https://www.reddit.com/r/PFSENSE/comments/5y3qr1/pushing_dns_to_ipsec_clients/
  * No internet access for VPN clients: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=11340.0
  * No internet access for VPN clients: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=7477.0
  * And more: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=14141.0
  * And even more: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=14860.0;prev_next=prev#new
* Allowing same user to connect multpile times: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=19462.0

## Unrelated: OPNsense OpenVPN for Windows

Pretty much did exactly what it says on https://docs.opnsense.org/manual/how-tos/sslvpn_client.html with the added note that I checked "Redirect Gateway" to force all client traffic over the VPN. Furthermore, I used VPN → OpenVPN → Client Export to export the user's configuration as `.ovpn` file, which can be imported directly into [OpenVPN for Windows](https://openvpn.net/client-connect-vpn-for-windows/).

## Unrelated: Notes to self

These are unrelated to the above. To fix slow bootup problems timing out on ahcich0: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=15727.0; in short, add `# notrim` to the first real line in `/etc/fstab`.

Commit message:

Add link to OPNsense OpenVPN legacy migration

README.md, after:

# IPsec VPN on OPNsense with iOS, macOS

Getting IPsec VPN on OPNsense to work with iOS and macOS was too difficult.

## Versions

OPNsense 23.1.7_3 (but verified up to OPNsense 24.7.5_3)
iOS 16 and up
macOS Monterey and up

## Add group "VPN" [optional]

This step is optional, but it helps to ensure that only users in the VPN group can obtain VPN access.

System → Access → Groups → + (Add)
Group name: VPN
Description: VPN users

## Add one VPN user

System → Access → Users → + (Add)
Username: vpnuser *(or any other name that you prefer)*
Password: [password]

Optional (if you created the VPN group before)
Group membership: make sure that "Member Of" contains "VPN"

## Create IPsec VPN, configure Mobile Clients

VPN → IPsec → Mobile Clients
[unless otherwise noted, all checkboxes are off]
✅ Enable IPsec Mobile Client Support
Backend for authentication: Local Database
(Optional, if you created a "VPN" group above): Enforce local group: VPN
Virtual IPv4 Address Pool: ✅ Provide a virtual IPv4 address to clients
Virtual IPv4 Address Pool: 192.168.2.0/24
DNS Servers: ✅ Provide a DNS server list to clients
DNS Servers: Server #1: 192.168.1.1 *(this needs to be the local IP of your OPNsense router)*
DNS Servers: Server #2: 8.8.8.8 *(optional)*
DNS Servers: Server #3: 8.8.4.4 *(optional)*
Phase 2 PFS Group: off
[all other checkboxes are off]

Save, Apply changes

## Create IPsec VPN, Create Phase 1

VPN → IPsec → Mobile Clients, press on "Create Phase1" at the top of the page, in the blue message bar.
Connection method: default
Key Exchange version: auto
Internet Protocol: IPv4
Interface: WAN
Description: Mobile VPN *(or anything else descriptive)*

Phase 1 proposal (Authentication)
Authentication method: Mutual PSK + Xauth
My identifier: My IP address
Pre-Shared Key: *(insert some randomly generate garbage, make sure you store it in a password manager)*

Phase 1 proposal (Algorithms)
Encryption algorithm: AES
Encryption algorithm: 256
Hash algorithm: SHA256, SHA384, SHA512
DH key group: 2, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18

Advanced options
[all uncheck unless otherwise noted]
Install policy: ✅
NAT Traversal: Enable
Lifetime: 28800

Save, Apply changes

## Create IPsec VPN, Create Phase 2

VPN → IPsec → Tunnel Settings [legacy], in the newly created Phase 1 row, press on the + in the "Commands" column. (Do **NOT** press on the + below the row, because that creates a new Phase 1 row.)

Mode: Tunnel IPv4
Description: *(something descriptive or leave empty)*
Type: Network
Address: 0.0.0.0 / 0 *(that is, set "0.0.0.0" in the Address field and choose 0 from the dropdown)*
Protocol: ESP
Encryption algorithms: AES128, AES192, AES256
Hash algorithms: SHA256, SHA384, SHA512
PFS key group: off
Lifetime: 3600
Automatically ping host: [leave empty]

Save, Apply changes

## Enable IPsec!

VPN → IPsec → Tunnel Settings

✅ Enable IPsec (near the bottom of the page)

Apply changes

## Firewall settings: WAN rules

Firewall → Rules → WAN

Add the following three rules:

Interface: WAN
**TCP/IP Version: IPv4**
**Protocol: ESP**
Source: any
Destination: WAN address
Description: IPsec ESP

Interface: WAN
**TCP/IP Version: IPv4**
**Protocol: TCP/UDP**
Source: any
Destination: WAN address
**Destination port range: from: ISAKMP, to: ISAKMP**
Description: IPsec ISAKMP

Interface: WAN
**TCP/IP Version: IPv4**
**Protocol: UDP**
Source: any
Destination: WAN address
**Destination port range: from: IPsec NAT-T, to: IPsec NAT-T**
Description: IPsec NAT-T

The result should be:

 	IPv4 ESP      *   *   WAN address   *                      *     *     IPsec ESP
 	IPv4 UDP      *   *   WAN address   500  (ISAKMP)          *     *     IPsec ISAKMP
 	IPv4 UDP      *   *   WAN address   4500 (IPsec NAT-T)     *     *     IPsec NAT-T

Apply changes

## Firewall settings: IPsec rules

Firewall → Rules → IPsec

Add the following rule:

Interface: IPsec
TCP/IP Version: IPv4
Protocol: any
Source: any
Destination: any

The result should be:

```
IPv4 *     *     *     *     *     *     *
```

Apply changes

## Firewall settings: Outbound NAT

Firewall → NAT → Outbound

You should not have to touch anything here. But verify that Mode is set to "Automatic outbound NAT rule generation".

And verify that in the automatic rules you see the VPN network range listed under Source Networks (so 192.168.2.0/24 in this example).

## Make DNS respond to queries from the VPN

Services → Unbound DNS → Access Lists

Add the following (using the + / Add button):

Access List name: 192.168.2.0/24 *(this is an open field, it does not matter)*
Action: Allow
Network: 192.168.2.0 / 24 *(this needs to be the range you chose under Mobile Clients)*
Description: VPN DNS access

Save, Apply changes

## Optional: allow single user to create multiple VPN connections

Normally, a single user cannot create more than one simultaneous VPN connection (for example, using multiple devices). That means that a second device connecting to VPN with the same username would disconnect the first device's VPN connection.

### New method

You can change this by modifying/editing your Phase 1 and change the "Unique" parameter to one of the following values:

- Replace
  - A new connection will replace any existing one.
- Keep
  - A new connection will be blocked while there is an existing one
- No
  - Multiple connections can be made
- Never
  - The system will not check for multiple connections

Then save and apply the changes.

### Old Method

Previously, there was no UI option to fix this, so it required ssh access to the OPNsense server (via System → Settings → Administration → Enable Secure Shell).

Then ssh into the router, create file `/usr/local/etc/ipsec.opnsense.d/uniqueids-override.conf` and set it with the following contents:

```
config setup
  uniqueids = no
```

Then trigger a VPN restart through the UI.

## Ridiculous: A reboot may be necessary

Yes, this is ridiculous, but it did solve DNS problems for me and a number of other problems.

## Configuring IPsec VPN on iPhone
First make sure that your iPhone is outside of your WLAN.

Settings → VPN → Add VPN Configuration...

Type: IPsec
Description: [whatever you wish]
Server: [public IP of OPNsense router]
Account: vpnuser *(or the user you added above)*
Password: [password of vpnuser]
Use Certificate: [leave off]
Group Name: [leave empty]
Secret: [use the Pre-Shared Key configured above]

## Configuring IPsec VPN on macOS

System Preferences → Network → + (Add) button near the bottom left

Interface: VPN, VPN Type: Cisco IPSec
Service Name: VPN (OPNsense) *(or whatever name you like)*
Server Address: [public IP of OPNsense router]
Account Name: vpnuser *(or the user you added above)*
Password: [password of vpnuser]

Under Authentication Settings:
Shared Secret: [use the Pre-Shared Key configured above]

## Sources (thank you!)

* OPNsense setup, albeit incomplete: https://docs.opnsense.org/manual/vpnet.html
* Netgate documentation: https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/recipes/ipsec-mobile-ikev1-xauth.html
* A few forum discussions that helped
  * VPN Configuration: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=10955.0
  * Debugging DNS: https://www.reddit.com/r/PFSENSE/comments/5y3qr1/pushing_dns_to_ipsec_clients/
  * No internet access for VPN clients: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=11340.0
  * No internet access for VPN clients: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=7477.0
  * And more: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=14141.0
  * And even more: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=14860.0;prev_next=prev#new
* Allowing same user to connect multpile times: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=19462.0

## Unrelated: OPNsense OpenVPN for Windows

Pretty much did exactly what it says on https://docs.opnsense.org/manual/how-tos/sslvpn_client.html with the added note that I checked "Redirect Gateway" to force all client traffic over the VPN. Furthermore, I used VPN → OpenVPN → Client Export to export the user's configuration as `.ovpn` file, which can be imported directly into [OpenVPN for Windows](https://openvpn.net/client-connect-vpn-for-windows/).

You may be here looking to [migrate away from OPNsense OpenVPN](https://github.com/thomergil/opnsense-migrate-openvpn-legacy) legacy to the new configuration.

## Unrelated: Notes to self

These are unrelated to the above. To fix slow bootup problems timing out on ahcich0: https://forum.opnsense.org/index.php?topic=15727.0; in short, add `# notrim` to the first real line in `/etc/fstab`.
